Classical: 800 BCE - 500 CE

Featured building: Parthenon 
Location: Athens, Greece 
Completed: circa 432 BCE

Buildings of the Classical era represent some of the oldest structures in Western civilization and are marked by extreme symmetry and proportion. 

Spanning roughly 800 B.C to 500 A.D., architects used distinctive columns to prop up entablatures (horizontal supports) that often contained sculpts of Gods. The Parthenon, perhaps the epitome of Ancient Grecian architecture, stands as a shining example of column and entablature coming together in perfect symmetry. 

Classical forms are among the most re-sampled throughout history. Neo-classical, Renaissance, Classical Revival, and many other styles borrowed heavily from Ancient Greek and Roman builders. Particularly in the United States, government buildings, state capitols, museums, and banks often feature distinctive Classical columns. 

As the Roman empire continued to expand and encounter other cultures, architectural styles began to cross-pollinate, resulting in an entirely new style: Byzantine.

Byzantine: 500 CE - 1500 CE

Featured building: Hagia Sophia 
Location: Istanbul, Turkey 
Completed: circa 537 AD

Byzantine Architecture lasted from the 6th to the 15th centuries, rising and falling with the Byzantine Empire. Under Constantine the Great, the Roman empire moved its capitol to modern-day Turkey in the 4th century, sweeping in an era of engineering influence from across the Middle East.  

Builders added domed roofs (traditionally seen on mosques) to classical forms and switched to brick as their primary construction material. The Hagia Sophia stands as one of the first major architectural marvels to exemplify Byzantine architecture. 

In Europe, architects moved on to Romanesque architecture fairly quickly as society transitioned into medieval times. However, Byzantine architecture would continue to spread like wildfire throughout the Middle East and beyond: even today visitors to Russia can see the neo-Byzantine forms that extend across the entire Western portion of the country. 

Domed roofs in particular would prove to be a lasting addition to architecture around the world. In the United States and Eastern Europe, state capitols or government buildings often feature this distinctive dome. 

Romanesque: 500 CE - 1100 CE

Featured building: Collegiate Church of St. Mary and St. Alexius 
Location: Tum, Poland 
Completed: circa 1161 AD

After the fall of the Roman empire, Europe gradually emerged into a loose collection of political states. Commonly referred to as medieval times, this era saw aggressive military leaders request castles with thick walls and large towers as statements of power. 
 
Churches took on a similar look and feel during this period, losing the ornamental pieces, as well as the domed roofs. Instead they took on sturdy pillars and barrel vaulted interiors. 

The distinctive style known as Romanesque architecture developed at varying times across Europe from the 6th - 11th centuries. During this time, major events like the Crusades brought people and ideas, as well as building styles, across large swaths of Europe. Unlike other styles, which often took on local influence, the Romanesque look and feel is remarkably consistent from Western Europe to Eastern Europe. 

The Collegiate Church of St. Mary and St. Alexius in Poland features thick walls and semi-circular arches that remind viewers more of a castle than of a church. A relatively short-lived Romanesque revival bloomed in the 19th century in parallel with the Gothic revival.

In Europe, the feudal system began to fade and towns gained in prosperity and freedom. Accordingly builders began to expand on existing romanesque forms. Expansive requests to go higher and bigger would lead architects into the age of Gothic architecture.

Gothic: 1100 - 1500 CE

Featured building: Reims Cathedral 
Location: Reims, France 
Completed: circa 1275 AD

Gothic architecture, roughly spanning the 12th - 16th centuries, expanded on Romanesque styles, with taller and more intricate forms. Wealthy patrons, both religious and secular, encouraged builders to make powerful expressions. Pointed arches and flying buttresses were innovations by builders at the time to support higher and more expansive designs. 

On both the front and the back of the Reims Cathedral, a prototypical Gothic construction, there are many pointed arches; flying buttresses feature prominently on the back of the construction. 

In the United States and Europe, the Gothic revival in the 18th and 19th centuries sampled heavily from this period. 

As the Renaissance swept through Western societies, spurred by the philosophical and artistic return to Classical roots, builders broke away from the rigid medieval style embodied by the Romanesque and Gothic eras. 